---
layout: post
title: "On GraphQL"
excerpt: >
  First impressions on GraphQL. Growing community, tooling, and
  languages support. It could be a win!
---

**Disclaimer:** This is not a GraphQL tutorial or a getting started guide.

Late last year, I happened to come across a point where I had to soon, begin work
on a greenfield project. It required both web & mobile apps. I was a ruby guy and
so I decided straight away that my server will be powered by ruby. But I was
looking for a good client side solution that'll help reduce the learning curve
for building for both web and mobile since I haven't done any native iOS or
Android programming. I ended up with React, React Native as they seemed like it
fit the bill wrt to the project. And then, when I was reading more, this happened:

`React --> Relay --> GraphQL`

I landed up reading about GraphQL and it gave me a good first impression.

Here's what it is, from the official homepage:

> GraphQL is a data query language and runtime designed and used at Facebook to
request and deliver data to mobile and web apps since 2012. -- [graphql.org](http://graphql.org)

Though Facebook has been using it since 2012, it was released as an open source
RFC with a reference implementation in javascript (obviously), only last year.
So it was already running almost 2-3 years in a heavy-traffic production environment.

__TL; DR:__ *GraphQL aims at replacing your REST endpoints.*

## What?

Client specifies a *query string*. Server interprets it and returns data in the
specified format. Let's take the following example.

Sample query:

~~~ graphql
{
  user(id: 3500401) {
    id,
    name,
    isViewerFriend,
    profilePicture(size: 50)  {
      uri,
      width,
      height
    }
  }
}
~~~

returns:

~~~ graphql
{
  "user" : {
    "id": 3500401,
    "name": "Jing Chen",
    "isViewerFriend": true,
    "profilePicture": {
      "uri": "http://someurl.cdn/pic.jpg",
      "width": 50,
      "height": 50
    }
  }
}
~~~

*(Example taken from the official GraphQL docs)*

That's it. Client gets exactly what it asked for. The query string itself, looks
like how the data it wants to be like and IMO, this looks and feels very
intuitive

## How?

I've always had a small problem trying to wrap my head around HTTP verbs for
laying out the right way to structure my REST API. When you talk GraphQL via
HTTP, it essentially replaces your multiple REST endpoints to a single endpoint.
This is insanely sane. Imagine fetching data for a mildly complicated view. REST
would require multiple round trips between the client and the server to render
that single view. With GraphQL you make one HTTP call. The GraphQL server knows
what all queries it needs to aggregate and run in order to get what the client
asked for, like the above example. It's naturally parallelizable and you can
scale it however you want.

One important point to note here is that, GraphQL is only an *application layer
protocol* and that makes it even more powerful. It's not coupled to any specific
transport layer, in other words, no one says it should work only via HTTP.

This is especially important in today's world where we're moving beyond web and
mobile.

## Tooling

You'd expect only modern tooling from modern technologies and GraphQL is no
different. [GraphiQL](https://github.com/graphql/graphiql) is an in-browser IDE
for exploring GraphQL. Checkout the [live demo](http://graphql-swapi.parseapp.com).
It's super awesome and self-documenting. This would be your most used tool if
you're working with GraphQL. It's really a killer stuff to have.

Tooling in GraphQL makes use of the types and introspective capabilities of the
spec. Take a look at the [awesome-graphql](https://github.com/chentsulin/awesome-graphql)
repo for more and more tooling.

## Community

GraphQL will win only if the wider community adopts it. Whatever is your primary
language, you should be able to talk to the GraphQL servers.

I now come from the [Elixir](http://elixir-lang.org) community and I can assure
you that there's some good work going on. Visit
[graphql-elixir.org](http://graphql-elixir.org) for more info on that aspect.
But I believe there are faster or equally growing communities like
[Ruby](https://github.com/rmosolgo/graphql-ruby),
[Python](https://github.com/graphql-python/graphene) and other languages. I'm
planning to write a subsequent post on GraphQL from an elixir community viewpoint.

Firstly, if you want to get started, you should definitely go through the
[RFC](http://facebook.github.io/graphql) and the
[official docs and notes](http://graphql.org) around it. You'll understand more
about GraphQL and why Facebook built it in the first place. Then find out on-going
efforts regarding GraphQL from your community (hint: checkout the awesome-graphql
repo I linked above). Try to understand what % of the spec is implemented and
what is the community focusing on next. Try to contribute, build small projects
using GraphQL so that you unravel difficulties along the way and likely provide
solutions to solve them too.

## More

There's more to GraphQL than all this. As of this writing, I wouldn't say
GraphQL is super mature for production, though its been running on Facebook's
servers for the last 2-3 years. This implies there are so many other things
revolving this that requires attention. For ex: the official spec doesn't say
how to perform pagination, etc. There's no official way to do
authentication/authorization. I'd argue that GraphQL is just a query language
and it's up to each app to figure out it's auth story.

More on the postive side, this kind of abstraction provides us with a huge power.
You can decouple your stack in a way you couldn't have imagined previously. A
good example is [Meteor](https://www.meteor.com). It's a lock-in and super
highly opinionated framework. They recently realised that GraphQL could help them
be more less opinionated. The MDG is focusing on a new framework called Apollo
that makes use of GraphQL to achieve an awesome abstraction. Read more about it
[here](http://github.com/apollostack/apollo).

If this piqued your interest in any way, I strongly urge you to try it out in
your primary language. The best part is, you can incrementally move to GraphQL
and it could just work as an abstraction layer on top of your already up and
running implementations.
